README.md, before:

# 📚 FABulous Tutorial

## 🛠️ Task 1: Start FABulous and Build a First Fabric

1.  **Preparation (Directory and Environment):**
    - Follow the [FABulous Quick Start Guide](https://fabulous.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started/quickstart.html) to set up your environment.

    - Additionally, make sure you have the FABulator graphical FPGA Editor installed.
      You can install with the following command:

      ```bash
      FABulous install-fabulator
      ```

2.  **Generate a Template Project:**
    - We first generate a new template project:
      ```bash
      FABulous create-project demo`
      ```
    - This creates a directory structure under `./demo/`.

3.  **Customize the Fabric:**
    - Go into the `demo` root and open `fabric.csv` in a spreadsheet or editor program to explore the file.
    - **Resize the Fabric:** Resize the provided fabric by **removing the last two CLB (Configurable Logic Block) columns**.
      - They are named `LUT4AB`. Be careful not to interfere with other columns in the file.
      - When you shift the `RAM_IO` to the left, **don't forget the termination tiles**.
    - **Modifying Rows:** You could also add or remove rows, but that must be done in **units of two CLB rows** due to the DSP supertile which is two basic tiles (our CLBs) in height.
      - Moreover, that changes the interface of the fabric as we use connections at the left and right border of the fabric in the template.
    - _Note:_ It is possible to replace the north and south termination tiles with I/Os.
    - Save the `fabric.csv` file.

4.  **Build the Fabric (FABulous Shell):**
    - Start your project with the FABulous shell:
      ```bash
      cd demo # go to your demo project folder
      FABulous start # start the FABulous shell
      ```
    - Follow the steps displayed inside FABulous (starting with `load_fabric`).
      - _Tip:_ Play with `<TAB>` when entering commands; you can also fetch previous commands using the `<UP>` key.

    - **Run the build sequence:**
      1.  `FABulous> run_FABulous_fabric` (generates the fabric RTL, eFPGA_geometry and CAD tool models).
      2.  `FABulous> run_FABulous_bitstream ./user_design/sequential_16bit_en.v` (generates the bitstream for a simple 16-bit counter design).
      3.  `FABulous> run_simulation fst ./user_design/sequential_16bit_en.bin` (runs a functional simulation of the design with the generated bitstream).

5.  **View the Result in FABulator:**
    - When done, open the FABulator from the FABulous shell with:
      - `FABulous> start_FABulator`
    - Inside, run **File → Open** `demo/eFPGA_geometry.csv`.
    - Download the counter test example design with **File → Open FASM**.
      - FASM (FPGA Assembler) is a human-readable textual bitstream format (check it out).
      - The FASM that we generated is in `demo/user_design`.

**Congratulation, you just built your first FPGA\!** (We do the GDS part later ).

- **Under the Hood:**
  - This was quite automated. If you want to explore what happened under the hood, follow the steps in:
    - [FABulous Building the Fabric](https://fabulous.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/building_doc/building_fabric.html).
  - For that, check what is added in `demo/Tiles/LUT4AB` after each step.

---

## 🎨 Task 2: Customizing a Tile

1.  **Examine the Register File:**
    - Open a file browser and change into the `RegFile` directory under `demo/Tiles/`.
    - Open `RegFile_32x4.v` which contains the BEL (Basic Element) and study how the two configuration bits `ConfigBits` are used.
    - Note the commented lines 17 and 18 that specify symbolic names for the configuration bits.
    - You may also check the `LUT4AB` tile as another example.

2.  **Understanding the Architecture:**
    - The tile implements distributed memory in the form of a small register file primitive that is **4-bit wide and 32 entries deep**.
    - The primitive (also called BEL) has **1 write and two read ports**.
    - **Comparison with Xilinx/Altera:** The two read ports are not supported in distributed memory primitives of Xilinx or Altera FPGAs.
      - They would need two distributed memory LUTs per bit of, let's say, a RISC-V Register file, while we would need just 8 of our RegFile primitives for this case.

3.  **Customization Task:**
    - **Goal:** Add the possibility that, depending on a **third parameter (configuration bit)**, we will return a $0$ if we read from address $0$.
    - **Rationale:** This feature would save some LUTs in case we want to implement a RISC-V CPU on our FPGA because register $0$ is hardwired to $0$ in RISC-V.
    - **Implementation Method:**
      - We could make a copy of the `RegFile` (or `LUT4AB` tile) to derive a new custom tile.
      - This would also require us to derive a new custom tile descriptor in the `fabric.csv` file.
    - **Interfacing Notes:**
      - If we stick to the same BEL interface, that is all it takes to support a custom tile (**for instance something tailored to ML inference**).
      - Otherwise, the interfacing takes a few manual steps that are already automated.
        A tutorial for that is in the documentation:
        [FABulous Fabric Automation](https://fabulous.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/building_doc/fabric_automation.html)

---

## 📝 Homework

1.  Write a wrapper for your custom primitive and instantiate that in `sequential_16bit_en.v` (located in the `/user_design` sub folder).
2.  You can compile that inside FABulous with `run_FABulous_bitstream`.

### 💡 Example Reference: DSP Primitive Instantiation

An example that instantiates the DSP primitive is provided in the GitHub repository below.

- **Check lines 120-140**.
- **Check line 61**.
- **Link:** [vga_bram_mul.v](https://github.com/gatecat/fabulous-mpw2-bringup/blob/main/sim/test_design/vga_bram_mul.v)

Commit message:

Update README with installation and customization details
Added installation instructions for Java and Maven, updated command syntax for FABulous commands, and clarified notes regarding configuration bits and tile customization.

README.md, after:

# 📚 FABulous Tutorial

## 🛠️ Task 1: Start FABulous and Build a First Fabric

1.  **Preparation (Directory and Environment):**
    - Follow the [FABulous Quick Start Guide](https://fabulous.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started/quickstart.html) to set up your environment.

    - Additionally, make sure you have the FABulator graphical FPGA Editor installed.
  
      Make sure you have Java and Maven installed:
  
      ```bash
      $ sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk
      $ sudo apt install maven
      ```
      
      You can install with the following command:

      ```bash
      $ FABulous install-fabulator
      ```

2.  **Generate a Template Project:**
    - We first generate a new template project:
      ```bash
      $ FABulous create-project demo`
      ```
    - This creates a directory structure under `./demo/`.

3.  **Customize the Fabric:**
    - Go into the `demo` root and open `fabric.csv` in a spreadsheet or editor program to explore the file.
    - **Resize the Fabric:** Resize the provided fabric by **removing the last two CLB (Configurable Logic Block) columns**.
      - They are named `LUT4AB`. Be careful not to interfere with other columns in the file.
      - When you shift the `RAM_IO` to the left, **don't forget the termination tiles**.
    - **Modifying Rows:** You could also add or remove rows, but that must be done in **units of two CLB rows** due to the DSP supertile which is two basic tiles (our CLBs) in height.
      - Moreover, that changes the interface of the fabric as we use connections at the left and right border of the fabric in the template.
    - _Note:_ It is possible to replace the north and south termination tiles with I/Os.
    - Save the `fabric.csv` file.

4.  **Build the Fabric (FABulous Shell):**
    - Start your project with the FABulous shell:
      ```bash
      $ cd demo # go to your demo project folder
      $ FABulous start # start the FABulous shell
      ```
    - Follow the steps displayed inside FABulous (starting with `run_FABulous_fabric`).
      - _Tip:_ Play with `<TAB>` when entering commands; you can also fetch previous commands using the `<UP>` key.
      - _Tip:_ The `help` shows all available commands.

    - **Run the build sequence:**
      1.  `FABulous> run_FABulous_fabric` (generates the fabric RTL, eFPGA_geometry and CAD tool models).
      2.  `FABulous> run_FABulous_bitstream ./user_design/sequential_16bit_en.v` (generates the bitstream for a simple 16-bit counter design).
      3.  `FABulous> run_simulation fst ./user_design/sequential_16bit_en.bin` (runs a functional simulation of the design with the generated bitstream).

5.  **View the Result in FABulator:**
    - When done, open the FABulator from the FABulous shell with:
      - `FABulous> start_FABulator`
    - Inside, run **File → Open** `demo/eFPGA_geometry.csv`.
    - Download the counter test example design with **File → Open FASM**.
      - FASM (FPGA Assembler) is a human-readable textual bitstream format (check it out).
      - The FASM that we generated is in `demo/user_design`.

**Congratulation, you just built your first FPGA\!** (We do the GDS part later ).

- **Under the Hood:**
  - This was quite automated. If you want to explore what happened under the hood, follow the steps in:
    - [FABulous Building the Fabric](https://fabulous.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/building_doc/building_fabric.html).
  - For that, check what is added in `demo/Tiles/LUT4AB` after each step.

---

## 🎨 Task 2: Customizing a Tile

1.  **Examine the Register File:**
    - Open a file browser and change into the `RegFile` directory under `demo/Tiles/`.
    - Open `RegFile_32x4.v` which contains the BEL (Basic Element) and study how the two configuration bits `ConfigBits` are used.
        - _Note_: the commented lines 17 and 18 that specify symbolic names for the configuration bits.
    - Take a look at the Tile CSV and swtichmatirx list file
        - The `RegFile.csv` describes the tile interconnect
        - The `RegFile_switch_matrix.list` describes the internal routing, the switch matrix, of the tile
            - Can you spot how the BELs are connected?
        - _Note_: We use include directives to define common interconnects for all tiles. -> Check the Base files!
    - You may also check the `LUT4AB` tile as another example.

2.  **Understanding the Architecture:**
    - The tile implements distributed memory in the form of a small register file primitive that is **4-bit wide and 32 entries deep**.
    - The primitive (also called BEL) has **1 write and two read ports**.
    - **Comparison with Xilinx/Altera:** The two read ports are not supported in distributed memory primitives of Xilinx or Altera FPGAs.
      - They would need two distributed memory LUTs per bit of, let's say, a RISC-V Register file, while we would need just 8 of our RegFile primitives for this case.

3.  **Customization Task:**
    - **Goal:** Add the possibility that, depending on a **third parameter (configuration bit)**, we will return a $0$ if we read from address $0$.
    - **Rationale:** This feature would save some LUTs in case we want to implement a RISC-V CPU on our FPGA because register $0$ is hardwired to $0$ in RISC-V.
        - _Note_: If you change the number of Config Bits in a tile, either by editing a BEL or the swtichmatrix, you have to delete the Tile ConfiMem files.
          They will be regenerated during the next fabric generation run.
    - **Implementation Method:**
      - We could make a copy of the `RegFile` (or `LUT4AB` tile) to derive a new custom tile.
      - This would also require us to derive a new custom tile descriptor in the `fabric.csv` file.
    - **Interfacing Notes:**
      - If we stick to the same BEL interface, that is all it takes to support a custom tile (**for instance something tailored to ML inference**).
      - Otherwise, the interfacing takes a few manual steps that are already automated.
        A tutorial for that is in the documentation:
        [FABulous Fabric Automation](https://fabulous.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/building_doc/fabric_automation.html)

---

## 📝 Homework

1.  Write a wrapper for your custom primitive and instantiate that in `sequential_16bit_en.v` (located in the `/user_design` sub folder).
2.  You can compile that inside FABulous with `run_FABulous_bitstream`.

### 💡 Example Reference: DSP Primitive Instantiation

An example that instantiates the DSP primitive is provided in the GitHub repository below.

- **Check lines 120-140**.
- **Check line 61**.
- **Link:** [vga_bram_mul.v](https://github.com/gatecat/fabulous-mpw2-bringup/blob/main/sim/test_design/vga_bram_mul.v)
